They have quarreled from across the country and lobbed attacks over the airwaves, but on Wednesday night Donald J. Trump and Hillary Clinton will finally take each other on from the same stage.
While they will not appear together — voters will have to wait until a late September debate for that — the two presidential hopefuls will take turns fielding questions on national security and veterans issues, offering the clearest opportunity yet to compare and contrast the positions of the Republican and Democratic candidates. After weeks of scripted speeches and attack lines, the “commander in chief forum” will force Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton to think candidly on their feet.
The event, to be held in New York and broadcast at 8 p.m. Eastern on NBC and MSNBC, will be moderated by the “Today” anchor Matt Lauer and presented in conjunction with the group Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans for America.
The forum comes as polls show a tightening race between Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton, and national security an issue of serious concern among voters. Mr. Trump is widely viewed as the better candidate to tackle the threat of terrorism, but voter surveys show lingering skepticism about his temperament.
While Mrs. Clinton’s deep foreign policy experience is hard to dispute, the Trump campaign has cast her as someone who cannot be trusted to protect state secrets. Mr. Trump has hammered her for carelessly handling classified information as secretary of state, pointing to her use of a private email account.
Mr. Trump, for his part, has vowed to bolster the military and protect America’s veterans, but he also angered some of them last month by confronting the parents of a Muslim American soldier killed by a suicide bomber in Iraq and by denigrating the military service of Senator John McCain, who Mr. Trump said last year was “not a war hero.”
After the second episode, the Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans for America group called on Mr. Trump to apologize to veterans across the country.
Mr. Trump has been working to improve his standing with members of the military. This week he said that he had received endorsements from nearly 90 military figures and said that his candidacy provided an important opportunity for a national security “course correction.”
Veterans are a crucial voting block around the country, particularly in swing states like Florida, North Carolina and Virginia. While veterans and active-duty personnel historically lean Republican, data collected by the association on its members suggests that the fastest-growing segment of post-9/11 veterans may be those registered as independents.
Although both candidates generally played it safe in August, sticking to speeches and fund-raisers, they appear to be showing a growing willingness to face voters directly in the final two months of the campaign. Questions about pay for military members, housing allowances and fixing the Department of Veterans Affairs are expected to be top of mind.
A coin toss determined that Mrs. Clinton would take questions first, followed by Mr. Trump.